# Lab Report: Illuminating the Text

#### Jack Nolan

## Process Description

This lab was broken down into two distinct sections, each covering different times of historical publishing. The first of the scribal age, by copying texts in the light of candles, the second of the extensive mass production of books in the midst of letterpress's dominance as a production method, by exploring multiple different editions of a book produced between 1800 and 1850. For the first part of the lab, I was copying a letter by Virginia Woolf, by the light of a candle. Although the candlelight didn't really bother me, except for its occasional flickering, the hardest part of this section was just trying to read Virginia Woolf's handwriting! I mostly just gave up at this task, and just wrote down each letter which seemed to be most close to the letter she was writing. This pretty much just resulted in gibberish, with the occasional word or short phrase floating to the surface.

For the second part of this lab, we read a bunch of different versions of geography textbooks. Specifically, *Geography Made Easy: Being an Abridgement of American Geography* by Jedidiah Morse. Most of these texts were illustrated with a couple of maps. We explored how none of these books were quite the same, and how different printers were pretty much just printing different pirated versions of the books. I looked at two of the earlier editions, one being from before 1810 and the other before 1820.

## Observations

For the first part of the lab, I realized, midway through trying to translate Virginia Woolf's enigmatic handwriting, that it would almost certainly be easier to just directly copy each of her illegible letters, rather than trying to read it and produce a copy of it in my own handwriting. Then, I would have successfully copied the text and left the difficult challenge of reading and interpreting the handwriting to the reader of the copy, rather than myself. I believe back in Stephen Fry's *The Machine That Made Us*, or one of the other scribal texts we read, he mentioned that some scribes did not actually know how to read, but that didn't stop them from being able to copy words efficiently and effectively. As long as you can reproduce the swoops and sweeps of someone's handwriting, you have achieved your job as copier, and your understanding of the text does not actually matter. Copying does not necessarily require the ability to read, but something like letterpress composition does because the shapes of the letterforms must change. If I didn't just want to set a bunch of gibberish, I would need to know how to read Virginia Woolf's handwriting if I were composing her letter in type.

For the second part of the lab, we explored a bunch of different versions of the same book. The first thing we noticed was the shift from the use of the long s, 'ſ', in our earlier edition, to its disappearance in the later editions. This points to the changing tastes of readers and printers. Additionally, we looked at different qualities of printing endeavors. Some of the editions had pages of poorly inked type and misaligned paper. These editions, made with little care, were producing the cheap, poor quality, versions of the text, while other publishers using nicer paper and took more care in their printing. We were surprised to find most of the editions were illustrated with maps of the world and of the United States. Some of the cheaper editions did not even use full leather bindings, but marbled paper, which while perhaps prettier than the leather in the short term, it is not as sturdy and protective of the book which seems essential for school textbooks.

## Analysis

I found map illustrations of *Geography Made Easy* to be an interesting comparison to the Blake's printing technique. I believe the maps from the textbook were printed as engravings, accomplished by carving the design into a metal block, filling the carvings with ink, and then using a high-pressure press to push the ink onto a paper, creating an image. This kind of intaglio image making is excellent for highly detailed line work, like you would have on a map. It has a couple of technical downsides, like that it is hard to print large areas of darkness, but its main artistic downside is that you pretty much need to have your image fully planned out before you start engraving. Engraving is an extremely slow process, in fact, Joseph Viscomi mentions, "a square inch of close cross-hatching could take a full day or more", in his essay on *illuminated printing*, and in a large engraving, there could be many inches of cross-hatching. Most of Blake's commercial illustration work was accomplished this way, planning out the illustration and then executing it over a long period of time in metal until he had his completed plate.

Instead of executing engravings for his books, Blake instead came up with a new image making technique - one which had the ability to show the artist's hand in a way which was impossible before. All he needed to do was create his plates by drawing in an acid-resistant ink and then burn away the rest of the plates using the acid until only his drawings were left above everything else. This resulted in plates similar to woodcuts, where only the raised parts of the plates will be printed. However, unlike a woodcut, its production only required drawing on the plate where he wanted the printing to occur, rather than carving away everywhere he didn't, which would have again required substantial planning. With Blake's printing technique for his books, his prints were not the third repetition of a drawing, they were the first iteration of a drawing. In this way, his prints were much more akin with drawing than with most other types of prints. Of course, he could not achieve the accuracy and depth of detail which you can accomplish using engraving, but he could produce something more spontaneous.

William Blake's books also hook into the first part of the lab too - the handwriting part of the lab. Blake's printing technique allowed him to come closer to the medieval production of the handmade manuscript than anyone else in his time. This was partially achieved through his plates, where he would write all of the words of his book backwards on his so that he could print them so they would read normally. This, like scribes copying a manuscript, was a tedious process of handwriting - no letterpress type was used. Of course, this kind of handwriting on plates had existed for a long time, like on the maps in our book. So, the real advancement which brought his productions more in line with the productions of the medieval scribes is his use of color. Especially in his later editions, every page was awash in colors and paintings. While we didn't really explore this in our lab in class, handwritten books can be easily filled with color because it is not so difficult to switch the color you are writing in - you just need to switch bottles of ink. But, when printing a book by letterpress, printing a text in multiple colors requires that you plan each page ahead exactly so that all of the lines and spacings match up exactly. In order to print illustrations, multiple plates need to be created, and each must be lined up exactly. In fact, some color images used multiple different types of printing in multiple different colors to achieve a seamless color image, something which would be way too costly to ever do for every page of a book. It is with his color that Blakes takes another step towards the production of the medieval book - specifically, in his variations of usages between different books. Like every medieval manuscript, every book Blake produced looked different because he and his wife could color each of the illustrations differently each time. Why not make a dress blue one time and yellow another? This kind of variance is pretty much impossible to achieve in any way other than handwork. Perhaps, one could write a program to recolor parts of an image using computers today such that every resulting book would be different color-wise but the same content-wise, but that was impossible to do in Blake's day.
