# Lab Report: Letterpress II: Presswork

#### Jack Nolan

## Process Description

This lab involved taking our type which we set in our last lab and printing it on the press - a Golding Pearl No. 14. In order to do this, we picked up our already-composed type, by putting pressure on the corners of our blocks of type, and carried them to rest in the chase. We then surrounded the type with wooden furniture and locked it up by exerted a lot of pressure both horizontally and vertically using quoins. We then did a test lift to ensure none of the type fell out. Finally, we could lift the chase and gently slide it into the press. We operated the press by rotating a heavy flywheel and then getting it going with a foot peddle. Then caused some inking rollers to automatically ink the type and then the press closed, pushing the paper against the type, and then reopened, like a clamshell. We were the last group to print and do we ended up doing some "cowboy printing" because we needed to print on the backs of paper which had just been printed and were thus already wet. But this seemed to have gone well, as I don't believe we had any ink smudging, and thus we had printed all of our twitter bot poems.

## Observations

I had only ever previously printed from a proofing press before this, so I was honestly initially a little scared of the printing press and the ability to lose a finger accidentally. But, by operating the press really slowly, and restarting its rotation after every print was actually quite simple and left little risk of some crazy accident happening, which was pretty reassuring. In terms of setting up there are a couple of things that make sense timewise, but that I still found interesting, like that we didn't compose our chase on the composing stone, which I get is kind of small, and currently a bit out of the way. But it is extremely flat which makes it good for printing type, where the precision of the high really matters a lot, in ensuring none of the type gets damaged and the impression left by each is similar. I guess this goes with not using the stone, but I also found it interesting how we didn't flatten the type with the mallets and planers in the back of the room. This also helps in ensuring the evenness of your print. Anyway, what we did print seemed to have worked out pretty well, even if the press a bit over-inked.

As a quick note about the inking, which I mentioned to you before I left the class. The amount of ink you want to use depends on what you are printing. If you are printing large, even blocks of color, like with wood type or images, you would want to use more ink that in you are printing something delicate like blocks of type. The amount of ink on our press may have worked pretty well for printing things like large images or wood type, which really soak up a lot of ink, but it was definitely too much ink for printing type. This is why if you are trying to print wood type and metal type at the same time it may come out less clean than if you did them both separately and used the correct amount of ink for each print run. This is why a lot of wood block-type illustrations that went with text would have similar fine lines with the type - so that everything could be inked and print uniformly.

## Analysis

The production of a book is split up into three distinct main steps - the design, the printing, and the binding. The physical work of setting up a book to be printed letterpress is mainly split into two main steps, or functions - the setting of the type, and the printing from the type. If someone is printing a really long book, these two steps will often overlap as the printer runs out of type to set and must print all of the type so it can be sorted out and printed from again. Indeed, these steps will often overlap just in the general production of a book, as a page goes from composition to get proofed and back to composition to fix any errors and possibly back for more proofing before ending up on the actual press to run off all of the actual prints. This lab represented the second of these steps, in the ballet of letterpress, the actual printing - the payoff of all of the work compositing the type. 

This process of production can clearly be seen in David Walker's *Appeal*, which has some very impressive composition work in it, filling out Walker's incredible typography. As explained by Marcy J. Dinius in *“Look!! Look!!! at This!!!!”: The Radical Typography of David Walker’s Appeal*, This recursive process can especially be seen by comparing different editions of the text. The typography of the book goes from more generally standard punctuation and capitalization, as could be expected from compositors, to more expressive and radical typography, full of runs of exclamation points, italicized phrases, and a smattering of both small and standard capitals. As Dinius explains, all of these changes and typographic flourishes "are essential to the message of the text" (58); they influence the way the reader reads the book aloud and in their head in a way which simply cannot be accomplished using only words. The changes also reveal the iterative process of printing, of resetting all of your type from edition to edition to cope with typographic changes and improve the reader's experience. In a way, this is similar to proofing your text and fixing all of its problems but spread out across three different versions of a book.

The chapter "the Real Life of Books" from *What We Talk About When We Talk About Books* by Leah Price is about how books are really used in the real world, rather than our rose-tinted nostalgic view of the book in the present moment. Indeed, the production of a full book was a truly risky endeavor, and rarely ever the main source of income for a print shop. Instead of the great romantic novels, printshops focused on all the mundane printed items that people still generally needed in their daily lives, items which today everyone would just get printed on their ink-jet printer. Letterpress printing wasn't fancy, it was utilitarian. You need a bunch of bills of sale or counterbonds or promissory notes? Benjamin Franklin's got you covered. Are you looking to get your novel published? It probably wouldn't happen unless the print was pretty sure they could sell enough copies to make any money on it. Those some of the huge changes as printing technologies have advanced, your average Joe was much more likely to be able to get their novel printed offset than by letterpress because the cost of the production went down so the probability of being able to make your money back went dramatically up. Again, this technological improvement has democratized publishing in our modern day; now literally anyone can get anything original published online, no matter how terrible your romance novel is, because it costs basically nothing to get your book on Amazon. It could very well be that no one will ever buy this book, but that doesn't matter because its production cost Amazon nothing. Thus, because there are so many ways of producing a book, each production type has taken on different roles: with letterpress printing, the most costly and thus generally relegated to fancy reprintings of classics and short stories which are guaranteed to sell well, offset printing, which houses cheaper editions of classics along with pretty much any more modern novel and books of all types which aren't seeking an arm and a leg from their buyers, and finally digital publishing, which houses all of the above categories, along with all of the strange and mysterious books that less than 100 people will ever buy.

-----
Note: Sorry this is a late by a day, I meant to finish this before Yom Kippur, but didn't quite get there. I figured I may as well upload something finished, even if this is a lab that gets dropped.

