# Reading Prep: Chapter 7 - Format

#### Jack Nolan

## Questions or Observations

1. Baxter’s Procrustes - Essay satirizing collectors of extremely fancy books. I must admit, I consider myself a bit of a rare book collector, but certainly not of the type satirized by the story, but this probably because I am not rich enough. I couldn't consider buying a book as an investment because the books that I own are just not worth enough. My collection of "fine press" or privately printed books are only those which I have found by looking at dozens of books and selecting those that are an extremely good deal, often below $10. I can't afford books with exquisite bindings or pristine conditions, but I can afford a relatively clean copy with nice printing and illustrations if you look hard enough. While I currently can't imagine buying a book, finding it has uncut edges, and leaving them uncut, perhaps I would, if in the future, I find myself caring more about the object of the book than the idea of the book. The book itself as art rather than the culmination of arts and crafts.
If you see a book purely as an investment, not for any artistic merit or for hoping that one could gleam any knowledge from it, then it may as well just be any objects. Then its contents, and what it makes you feel do not matter, like paintings in the art market.
2. The "Interleaf: Please Lay Flat" - the only way I could keep track of where I was at was by covering all of the text below where I was at with my hand, revealing only the line I was reading because it was impossible to keep track of where I was at across two columns of text. Yet, this somewhat uncomfortable way of reading reflects well the story of back pain preventing her from being able to read but in extremely uncomfortable positions.
3. I have long been doubtful that the idea of reading a physical, ink on paper, book is actually all that different from reading a book on a screen or an eBook, or even listening to them through an audiobook. Because, as the reading mentions, there are millions of different types of books, such that I don't believe there is one universally better way to experience them all. While I haven't done research into all of the studies listed by Leah Price, that the physical book can heal the body and mind more than any other form feel so unlikely to me, just like the counterclaims of scientists before them. They all kind of feel like they must be statistical anomalies - that if you did fair, unbiased testing over enough time you would probably come to the conclusion that none of it really made a difference.

