# Reading Prep: Chapter 3 - Type

#### Jack Nolan

## Questions or Observations

1. As Stephen Fry mentions, the world went from 0 to 20 million printed books in just 50 years. So, the question is: after the bible and all of the legal documents were printed, what else was printed in that early period? Was there fiction as well? What books have been lost to us over the past 500 years since they were produced, and what does this tell us about the culture that once produced and then lost those books?
2. As a Jew, I guess I haven't thought too much about how medieval, or pre-medieval the torah is. In many ways they are similar to the ancient codices of Christianity - they are hand written by scribes on parchment or vellum - except their form, the scroll, is of course different. It is always a bit of a treat to get to see a torah scroll opened and laid out and to see all of the hand work that goes into making them. After a quick google search, the cost of procuring a new torah scroll can be between 30,000 and 120,000 dollars! It is wild to think that all books were once made this way.
3. *In Praise of Scribes* - In the time of overlap between end of the age of scribes and the beginning of the age of printing. At the very end of this sermon, Trithemius states: "Copying requires greater diligence" over printing, which I'm not totally convinced is true. It takes an incredible amount of work to type-set an entire book, easily more work than it does to simply copy the work directly. Even if all of the type is already made, just the process or arranging a page can take a long time, as setting each individual letter requires grabbing some specific metal letter and putting it into the line, with the correct spacing between letters and words. At this point, the printer is only half-way there - they still need to print the thing! However, of course, the difference in effort changes over-all when you take into account that once the book is type-set, it is easy to print off as many copies as you desire, whereas copying a book much be achieved one book at a time. And thus, what Trithemius states will pretty much always be true, a hand written and copied book will always cost more to produce, and perhaps be worth more, in human effort, than a printed book.

