# Reading Prep: Chapter 4 - Press

#### Jack Nolan

## Questions or Observations

1. A lot of Walker's typography is not unlike what we use today when texting or commenting on the internet to express our emotions. Especially used on a lot of chat engines which use a form of Markdown for stylizing your messages, people fill their messages with bold and italics and extended runs of exclamation points to really try to get their tone to come across through their writing. In writing, it's not just the word choice that matters, it's the way the words are presented, that projects the author's message.
2. Any early book, like David Walker's *Appeal*, which is so heavily covered in typographic elements, should be noticed just for the difficulty it must have taken in producing the book. In typesetting, mixing small capitals and italics in so heavily with your text makes it much more difficult to manage and print because you would need to have so many more cases of type out to switch between when setting and re-sorting the type. Dinius briefly discusses this when talking about Walker's extended runs of exclamation points on page 59, where he points out that the compositors would only have so many exclamation points or other elements like manicules, in their collection, making such widespread usage of these elements in this text really point out their importance.
3. The further I get into *What We Talk About When We Talk About Books*, the more I start to think about its design, perhaps inspired by our first day discussion. Why is the typeface used for the text body so different from that used for the header text and the page number? I really like the way the numbers in the text body are presented with 6s and 9s extending out of the normal lowercase zone, whereas the numbers on the bottom are all uniformly the same height. Also, I have started to find myself increasingly distracted by the fact that sometimes the text of two pages facing each other are not aligned horizontally, one side being a whole half-line above the other, or that the text on one side of a leaf may not be aligned with the text on the other side of the leaf.
